[RFC] Custom Health Checks using CEL expressions (#5151)
fluxcd/flux2: rfcs/0000-custom-health-checks/README.md

conditions that need to be met in order to determine the status of a custom resource.
We will introduce a new field called `healthCheckExprs` in the `Kustomization` CRD
which will be a list of CEL expressions for evaluating the status of a particular
Kubernetes resource kind.

## Motivation

Flux uses the `kstatus` library during the health check phase to compute owned 
resources status. This works just fine for all the Kubernetes core resources
and custom resources that comply with the `kstatus` conventions.

There are cases where the status of a custom resource does not follow the
`kstatus` conventions. For example, we might want to compute the status of a custom
resource based on a condition other than `Ready`. This is the case for resources
that do intermediate patching like `Certificate` where you should look at the `Issued`
condition to know if the certificate has been issued or not before looking at the
`Ready` condition.

In order to provide a generic solution for custom resources, that would not imply
writing a custom `kstatus` reader for each CRD, we need to provide a way for the user
to express the conditions that need to be met in order to determine the status.

> And we need to do this in a way that is flexible enough to cover all possible use cases,
> without having to change Flux source code for each new use case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It should be done in a way that is flexible enough to cover all possible use cases,
without having to change Flux source code for each new one.
```

specify the conditions that need to be met in order to determine the status of
a custom resource. This enables Flux to query any `.status` field,
besides the standard `Ready` condition, and evaluate it using a CEL expression.

#### Use Flux dependencies for Kubernetes ClusterAPI

> As a Flux user, I want to be able to use Flux dependencies bases on the 
> readiness of ClusterAPI resources, so that I can ensure that my applications
> are deployed only when the ClusterAPI resources are ready.

The ClusterAPI resources have a `Ready` condition, but this is set in the status
after the cluster is first created. Given this behavior, at creation time, Flux
cannot find any condition to evaluate the status of the ClusterAPI resources,
thus it considers them as static resources which are always ready.

Using `.spec.healthCheckExprs`, Flux users can specify that the `Cluster`
kind is expected to have a `Ready` condition which will force Flux into waiting
for the ClusterAPI resources status to be populated.

### Alternatives

We need an expression language that is flexible enough to cover all possible use
cases, without having to change Flux source code for each new use case.

> An alternative that have been considered was to use `CUE` instead of `CEL`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An alternative that has been considered was to use `CUE` instead of `CEL`.
```

    name: flux-system
  path: ./certs
  wait: true
  healthCheckExprs:
  - apiVersion: cert-manager.io/v1
    kind: Certificate
    inProgress: "status.conditions.filter(e, e.type == 'Issuing').all(e, e.observedGeneration == metadata.generation && e.status == 'True')"
    failed: "status.conditions.filter(e, e.type == 'Ready').all(e, e.observedGeneration == metadata.generation && e.status == 'False')"
    current: "status.conditions.filter(e, e.type == 'Ready').all(e, e.observedGeneration == metadata.generation && e.status == 'True')"
```

The `.spec.healthCheckExprs` field contains an entry for the `Certificate` kind, its `apiVersion`,
and the CEL expressions that need to be met in order to determine the health status of all custom resources
of this kind reconciled by the Flux `Kustomization`.

Note that all the Kubernetes core resources are discarded from the `healthCheckExprs` list.

### Custom Health Check Library

To help users define custom health checks, we will provide on the [fluxcd.io](https://fluxcd.io)
website a library of custom health checks for popular custom resources.

The Flux community will be able to contribute to this library by submitting pull requests

> to the `fluxcd/website` repository. 

Reviewer: maybe a link here?

Author: Done

### User Stories

#### Configure health checks for non-standard custom resources

> As a Flux user, I want to be able to specify health checks for
> custom resources that don't have a Ready condition, so that I can be notified
> when the status of my resources transitions to a failed state based on the evaluation
> of a different condition.

Using `.spec.healthCheckExprs`, Flux users have the ability to
specify the conditions that need to be met in order to determine the status of
a custom resource. This enables Flux to query any `.status` field,
besides the standard `Ready` condition, and evaluate it using a CEL expression.

Example for `SealedSecret` which has a `Synced` condition:

```yaml
  - apiVersion: bitnami.com/v1alpha1
    kind: SealedSecret

>     inProgress: "metadata.generation != status.observedGeneration"

Reviewer: note that checking the generation for `inProgress` is done by default by in the POC. But as we perform the evaluation with the whole object, any field can used in the expression.

Author: Not all CRDs have `status.observedGeneration` for example one of Flux Operator nor ClusterAPI, it's kinda bad practice since observedGeneration should be per condition.

Author: I've added a note about automatic evaluation of observedGeneration.

	// +optional
	InProgress string `json:"inProgress,omitempty"`
	// Failed is the CEL expression that determines if the status
	// of the custom resource has failed to reach the desired state.
	// +optional
	Failed string `json:"failed,omitempty"`
}
```

If a CEL expression evaluation results in an error, for example looking for a field that does not exist,
the expression result will be considered as `false`. Users should be encouraged to test their expressions
in the [CEL Playground](https://playcel.undistro.io/). Here is where the community maintained
[library](#custom-health-check-library) will be super useful as some of the expressions might be complex.

The `InProgress` expression is optional, when not specified the  controller will determine
if the resource is in progress if both `Failed` and `Current` evaluate to `false`.
Moreover, if the `InProgress` expression is not specified and the custom resource has a
`.status.observedGeneration` field, the controller with compare it with the `.metadata.generation`
field to determine if the resource is in progress.

The `Failed` expression is optional, when not specified the controller will keep evaluating the

> `Current` expression until it returns `true`, and gave up after the timeout is reached.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Current` expression until it returns `true`, and give up after the timeout is reached.
```

> Users should be encouraged to provide a `Failed` expression to avoid staling the reconciliation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users will be encouraged to provide a `Failed` expression to avoid staling the reconciliation
```

resources status. This works just fine for all the Kubernetes core resources
and custom resources that comply with the `kstatus` conventions.

There are cases where the status of a custom resource does not follow the
`kstatus` conventions. For example, we might want to compute the status of a custom
resource based on a condition other than `Ready`. This is the case for resources
that do intermediate patching like `Certificate` where you should look at the `Issued`
condition to know if the certificate has been issued or not before looking at the
`Ready` condition.

In order to provide a generic solution for custom resources, that would not imply
writing a custom `kstatus` reader for each CRD, we need to provide a way for the user
to express the conditions that need to be met in order to determine the status.
It should be done in a way that is flexible enough to cover all possible use cases,
without having to change Flux source code for each new CRD.

### Goals

- Provide a generic solution for users to customise the health check evaluation of custom resources.
- Provide a space for the community to contribute custom health checks for popular custom resources.

### Non-Goals

> - We do not plan to support custom health checks for Kubernetes core resources.

Author: Yes we'll not create an exclusion list, this is more to say that  users should let kstatus will run its own logic for core resources which are quite complex and can't be replaced with CEL.

}

type CustomHealthCheck struct {
	// APIVersion of the custom resource under evaluation.
	// +required
	APIVersion string `json:"apiVersion"`
	// Kind of the custom resource under evaluation.
	// +required
	Kind string `json:"kind"`
	// Current is the CEL expression that determines if the status
	// of the custom resource has reached the desired state.
	// +required
	Current string `json:"current"`
	// InProgress is the CEL expression that determines if the status
	// of the custom resource has not yet reached the desired state.
	// +optional
	InProgress string `json:"inProgress,omitempty"`
	// Failed is the CEL expression that determines if the status
	// of the custom resource has failed to reach the desired state.
	// +optional
	Failed string `json:"failed,omitempty"`
}
```

If a CEL expression evaluation results in an error, for example looking for a field that does not exist,
the health check will fail. Users will be encouraged to test their expressions
in the [CEL Playground](https://playcel.undistro.io/). Here is where the community maintained
[library](#custom-health-check-library) will be super useful as some of the expressions might be complex.

> The `InProgress` expression is optional, when not specified the  controller will determine

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `InProgress` expression is optional, when not specified the controller will determine
```

> if the resource is in progress if both `Failed` and `Current` evaluate to `false`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
if the resource is in progress if both `Failed` and `Current` do not evaluate to `true`.
```

`Failed` is also optional, so the suggested wording makes more sense.

		gvk:                 gvk,
	}
}

func (g *CELStatusReader) Supports(gk schema.GroupKind) bool {
	return gk == g.gvk.GroupKind()
}

func (g *CELStatusReader) ReadStatus(ctx context.Context, reader engine.ClusterReader, resource object.ObjMetadata) (*event.ResourceStatus, error) {
	return g.genericStatusReader.ReadStatus(ctx, reader, resource)
}

func (g *CELStatusReader) ReadStatusForObject(ctx context.Context, reader engine.ClusterReader, resource *unstructured.Unstructured) (*event.ResourceStatus, error) {
	return g.genericStatusReader.ReadStatusForObject(ctx, reader, resource)
}
```

The `genericConditions` function will take a `kind` and a map of `CEL` expressions as parameters
and returns a function that takes an `Unstructured` object and returns a `status.Result` object.

````go
import (
  "github.com/fluxcd/cli-utils/pkg/kstatus/status"
  "github.com/fluxcd/pkg/runtime/cel"
  "k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/apis/meta/v1/unstructured"
)

func genericConditions(kind string, exprs map[string]string) func(u *unstructured.Unstructured) (*status.Result, error) {
  return func(u *unstructured.Unstructured) (*status.Result, error) {
		obj := u.UnstructuredContent()

> 		for statusKey, expr := range exprs {

Reviewer 2: This `map[string]string` could be a struct:

```go
type HealthCheckExpressions struct {
	// Current is the CEL expression that determines if the status
	// of the custom resource has reached the desired state.
	// +required
	Current string `json:"current"`
	// InProgress is the CEL expression that determines if the status
	// of the custom resource has not yet reached the desired state.
	// +optional
	InProgress string `json:"inProgress,omitempty"`
	// Failed is the CEL expression that determines if the status
	// of the custom resource has failed to reach the desired state.
	// +optional
	Failed string `json:"failed,omitempty"`
}
```

And the struct `CustomHealthCheck` could embed this struct inlining the JSON fields:

```go
type CustomHealthCheck struct {
	// APIVersion of the custom resource under evaluation.
	// +required
	APIVersion string `json:"apiVersion"`
	// Kind of the custom resource under evaluation.
	// +required
	Kind string `json:"kind"`

	HealthCheckExpressions `json:",inline"`
}
```

This is not only better in terms of typing but also avoids the random iteration order of maps in Go. Why is a predictable order better in this case? Because, despite being a configuration error to write CEL expressions that evaluate both `Current` and `Failed` to `true`, a random iteration order in the map will produce random results, sometimes one that the user will deem expected, sometimes one that does not make sense. A predictable processing order will make it easier to debug this scenario. This is useful because we are not able to parse the expressions and say if they're conflicting or not before evaluating them for an actual input.

Author: Great suggestion! We can iterate over it in the implementation, the guide lines here are more about how the public API will look for users than how we'll actually implement the kstatus extension.

			// Use CEL to evaluate the expression
			result, err := cel.ProcessExpr(expr, obj)
			if err != nil {
				// handle error
			}
			switch statusKey {
			case status.CurrentStatus.String():

> 			// If the expression evaluates to true, we return the current status

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
			// If the expression evaluates to true, we return the Current status
```

			case status.FailedStatus.String():

> 			// If the expression evaluates to true, we return the failed status

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
			// If the expression evaluates to true, we return the Failed status
```

			case status.InProgressStatus.String():

> 			// If the expression evaluates to true, we return the reconciling status

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
			// If the expression evaluates to true, we return the InProgress status
```

			}
		}
		

> 		// If none of the expressions evaluate to true, we return the reconciling status

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
		// If none of the expressions evaluate to true, we return the InProgress status
```

and returns a function that takes an `Unstructured` object and returns a `status.Result` object.

````go
import (
  "github.com/fluxcd/cli-utils/pkg/kstatus/status"
  "github.com/fluxcd/pkg/runtime/cel"
  "k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/apis/meta/v1/unstructured"
)

func genericConditions(kind string, exprs *kustomizev1.HealthCheckExpressions,
) func(u *unstructured.Unstructured) (*status.Result, error) {

	return func(u *unstructured.Unstructured) (*status.Result, error) {
		obj := u.UnstructuredContent()

		result, err := cel.ProcessBooleanExpr(exprs.Current, obj)
		if err != nil {
			return nil, err
		}
		if result {
			// return Current status
		}

		if exprs.Failed != "" {
			result, err = cel.ProcessBooleanExpr(exprs.Failed, obj)
			if err != nil {
				return nil, err
			}
			if result {
				// return Failed status
			}
		}

		if exprs.InProgress != "" {
			result, err = cel.ProcessBooleanExpr(exprs.InProgress, obj)
			if err != nil {
				return nil, err
			}
			if result {
				// return InProgress status
			}
		} else {
			// compare status.observedGeneration with metadata.generation
		}

> 		// return InProgress status

Author: > The InProgress expression does not need to exist.

We shouldn't be evaluating `Current` nor `Failed` if `InProgress` returns `true`, so makes a lot of sense to have `InProgress` since we avoid false positives. As for `status.observedGeneration` not all CRs have it, also not CRs have `observedGeneration` on their conditions, so there is no way to avoid false positives of Current/Failed if we don't evaluate `InProgress`.

> 		// return InProgress status

Reviewer 2: > We shouldn't be evaluating `Current` nor `Failed` if `InProgress` returns `true`

Then `InProgress` must be the first one evaluated, correct?

> 		// return InProgress status

Author: The order would be:

- if `status.observedGeneration` exists and if it is diffrent to `metadata.generation` then return `InProgress` and don't bother evaluating anything.
-  if `exprs.InProgress` is defined, evaluate it and if it's `true` then return `InProgress` and don't bother evaluating anything else. If it evaluates to `false` then continue with  `exprs.Failed`.
- if `exprs.Failed` is defined, evaluate it and if it's `true`  then return `Failed` and don't bother evaluating `Current`.  If it evaluates to `false` then continue with  `exprs.Current`.
- if `exprs.Current` evaluates to `true` then return `Current`, if evaluates to `false` then return `InProgress`.

> 		// return InProgress status

Reviewer 2: Checking the generation in this context and bailing if it doesn't match, i.e. not checking any of the configured expressions, seems a bit weird to me. This means that if the resource type has `status.observedGeneration` then it doesn't matter what healthcheck expressions you configure for it, they will never be checked. At the same time, if we implement the logic like this, the only way you can have a resource type that has `status.observedGeneration` be checked through this observed generation is by configuring a custom healthcheck for this type, which requires you to specify at least a `Current` expression, which will never be checked! This UX does not look good to me. If this is the logic that we want, then we should decouple checking observed generation from this feature.

> 		// return InProgress status

Reviewer 2: By that I mean: Regardless if the type has a `CustomHealthCheck` object configured for it or not, we first check the generation. If it exists and differs, then we consider the resource `InProgress`. Else, we let a custom health check for that type kick in if it was configured.

> 		// return InProgress status

Author: kstatus does this already, for any CR is looks at `status.observedGeneration`, hence my suggestion to do the same when custom checks are defined.

> 		// return InProgress status

Reviewer 2: Cool, we can definitely do that 👍

But the configuration for that should be: nothing.

And not this:

```yaml
healthCheckExprs:
- apiVersion: my.type.with.observed.generation.io/v1
  kind: MyType
  current: whatever
```

Which is what I implied from the current state of the RFC and this discussion.

I'll update the RFC to make it clear that this configuration is not needed for types with observed generation 👌

> 		// return InProgress status

Reviewer 2: In other words, a custom healthcheck should only be defined for a type if `status.observedGeneration == metadata.generation` does not imply `Current`.

> 		// return InProgress status

Reviewer 2: Okay I understand now. The fact is that `status.observedGeneration == metadata.generation` is most of the time inconclusive for CRs, you usually have to look at conditions to determine the health. I'll try to rephrase things to make this clearer 👍

> 		// return InProgress status

Reviewer 2: Is it possible that `status.observedGeneration` exists and is different from `metadata.generation`, but the CR is actually `Failed` due to an unconventional design for the conditions?

> 		// return InProgress status

Author: No that would be a bug in the controller, since you can't reach a final state unless the observedGeneration reaches the actual generation.

> 		// return InProgress status

Reviewer 2: all fixed :+1:
